part two the middle years 1914 to 1939
sometime in 1915 the Japanese warship
Osama went aground in Turtle Bay in the
Gulf of Lower California the presence of
this vessel in that part of the world
was not a total surprise as Japanese
fleet units had been previously cited a
few times in the area earlier the Grand
Admiral of Nippon had paid a visit to
Mexico expounding a blood-brother theme
what appeared to be somewhat incredible
about this incident was that the
formidable veterans of Tsushima could be
so inept as to allow this accident to
happen indeed it subsequently became
questionable that the event was an
accident at all according to Sidney mash
beer an intelligence officer destined to
gain fame with General Douglas
MacArthur's allied translator and
interpreter section during World War two
there were quote unquestionable proofs
that whole companies of Japanese
soldiers had traversed a part of
southern Arizona in 1916 during secret
exercises proceedings that could only
have been associated with the assam --is
wallowing in the mud the previous year
end quote quote as an intelligence
officer in 1916 with the first arizona
infantry he had been detailed by that
general Funston of Aguinaldo fame on a
mission to seek the truth of rumors
among Indians of Japanese columns
present in northern Sonora in Mexico
mash beer who later acted as a spy for
America in Manchuria tramped across the
desert which he knew well enough to make
the first map of it our army ever had
his knowledge of the desert told him
that even the Japanese incredible
marchers that they were could not have
made the trip without violating Arizona
Territory to the north for water
he made his estimate and headed for the
area he believed they would have to
touch there he discovered Japanese
ideographs written in charcoal upon the
rock walls of Pass
of the tane Haas Atlas Mountains they
were he estimated the notes of column
commanders who had gone before to those
who would follow his own Indian scouts
told him that parties of fifty came
ashore at intervals and made the killing
March mash spear hastened to send a
detailed report to Washington but in
1916 a general staff that had no
intelligence section for receiving and
assessing information appended a comment
to the report that the ideograph had no
military value even in retrospect as he
was telling the story mash beers
mustachios bristled the point completely
missed by that commentator was of course
that any indication of Japanese presence
in Arizona or northern Mexico at that
time had the highest military
implication one can only imagine how a
similar bit of information indicating
the presence of Americans on Hokkaido
would have been treated by Tokyo
intelligence analysts at that time end
quote
footnote Allison IND a short history of
espionage New York David McKay company
1963 pages 131 through 132 and footnote
although war had been raging in Europe
for two years when this incident
occurred military intelligence was
practically non-existent in the United
States
the military information division had
become the second section g2 of the new
General Staff organization in 1903
however because it had no champions
among the Army's leadership it was
transferred to the War College in 1908
and fell under an unappreciative and
insensitive committee leadership within
that institution in 1910 its forces and
identity dwindled when the United States
entered the world war the new chief of
staff general patency march discovered
his intelligence personnel consisted of
two officers and two clerks
footnote patency March the nation at war
New York
Doubleday Duran & Company 1932 page 226
end footnote returning from Asian duty
in 1915 where he had seen intelligence
service as organizer and head of the
Philippines military Information Bureau
major Ralph H Van Diemen came to the
information branch of the War College
quote he was delighted but soon found
reason to be appalled he discovered that
reports had been coming in from all over
a warring world gathered by
conscientious military attache and from
intelligence organizations of
belligerence on both sides a treasure
trove of information but these priceless
documents had never left the War College
building and daemon found them in tall
dusty piles and other piles were
telegrams marked urgent filed by an
information officer especially assigned
to General John J Pershing then engaged
on the Villa punitive expedition in the
same regions of northern Mexico that
were giving so much concern to
Washington these had never left the room
where they had been filed end quote and
daemon attempted to correct this
situation by appealing first to the
president of the Army War College urging
that the military information division
be re-established but correspondents
endorsing this recommendation was
ignored by the chief of staff general
Hugh Scott next Van Diemen's sought the
relocation of the division naming the
command and General Staff school at Fort
Leavenworth as a possible site but
shortly after eleven worth endorsed the
plan officials in Washington and London
became aware of it and condemned the
action General Scott quashed the
proposal and almost did the same for Van
Diemen's assignment America would be at
war before the revival of the military
information division occurred
[Music]
this is our hidden history
Oh